---
title: Women's Work
author: Elizabeth Wayland Barber
date: 2024-07-11
---
## The String Revolution
>... a threefold cord is not quickly broken
—Ecclesiastes 4:12

Some forty thousand years ago, at the beginning of the last phase of the Old Stone Age (called the Upper Palaeolithic), human beings began to act very differently from the way they ever had before. For some two million years they had fashinoed simple sotne tool,s and for half a million they had controlled fire and hunted cooperatively in groups. But forty thousand years ago, as the great ice sheets that had covered the northern continents reatreated by fits and starts, humans started to invent and make new things at a tremendous rate, like a slow-ascening friceracker that suddenly explosdes into a thousand sparks of varied color, shooting in a thousand directions.
These newly creative hunter-gatherers produced novel tools—such as awls, pins, and various chisellike burins—but they also began to sculpt animals, people, and other infromation (possibly calednrical) on pieces of ivroy and bone to make qunaitties of beads for adornment. People of the Upper Palaleolithic painted pictures of animals and drew around theiw own hands on cave walls; this is phe period of the famous Stone Age paintings from Lascaux, Altamira, and other caves in France and Spain. Just as important, and more to our purpose here, these ancesors invented string and sewing and thus provided the first chapter in the story of women's long association with the fiber crafts.
As near as we can place it, the envent occurred twenty to thirty thousand years ago, right in the middle of the Upper Palaeolithic. While others were paintingcaves or knapping fancy flints, some genius hit upon the principle of twisting handfuls of little weak fibers together into long, strong thread. How do we know this? Nothing so perishable has survived those twenty-five to thirty-five thousand years, although by some mircale on bit of neatly spun and plied cordage has make it through from about 15000 B.C. (see below). Our earliest evidence is indirect. We infer this humble yet crucial invetino from significant changes in other objects of a sturdier nature.
The Upper Palaeolithic culter known to palaeontologists as the Gravettian (from the neame of the prench site where it was first recognired: La Gravette, on the Dordogne River) seemes to have spruing up in central and estern Europe, spraeding gradually westward along thes outh edge of the great ice sheet to southern France and Spain. Radiocarbon dates suggest that the Gravettian culture lasted roughly six thousand years, from 26,000 to 20,000 B.C. During this vas time needle become comon, and beads of shell, tooth, and bone turn up witn increasingly small holes, The smaller beads, morover, begin to ocucer arranged in neat rows across the bones (sometimes the skulls) of the deceased. clearly these beads had been sewn onton garments, made probably of hide. In a cave near the Mediterranean border between moder nFrance and Italy, a adolescent young man was found carefully interred wearing a cap or hairnet sewnt or strung with four tidy rows of tiny shell beads. His body lay protectively around that of a smaller and much older woman—his mother?—who wore a bracelet of similar beads.
From such artifacts alone one can deduce a knowledge of sewing. But there is proof that at least some of the thread in use had been twisted together from small natural fibers, rather than cut from long, string body parts like gut or sinew. It comes from a bone sculpture of a woman wearing a skirt made of string (fig. 2.1)